---
title: 2018 - Year in Review
createdOn: "2018-12-31T22:02:08+05:30"
status: published
series:
  order: 2
  title: Year Reviews
tags:
  - Blogging
  - Learning
  - Personal Growth
  - Year Review
category: Personal
description: >-
  A personal reflection on 2018, detailing lifestyle improvements, blogging
  achievements, and a newfound passion for reading and economics.
updatedOn: "2025-05-29T16:19:15+05:30"
_categorized: 5b498497fbc8b54c4d23d4a76ce08893
---

The year 2018 has been quite a roller coaster year for me. I saw many ups and
downs, many successes, and many failures faced many challenges on the personal
front and struggled to keep myself on track. I have been working hard on
improving my lifestyle (not materialistically) for the last few years, and the
benefits have begun to show up now. This year was a pinnacle in that aspect. A
lot of micro changes happened in my life this year.

I often read my blog posts from last year. Reading these posts give me a good
feeling about the improvements that I could bring in myself during the previous
three years. Writing year [reviews](/notes/2017-the-best-till-now/) and posts
like [this](/notes/beginning-a-new-journey/),
[this](/notes/mistakes-that-i-made-in-nitc/) and
[this](/notes/deactivated-my-facebook-account/) serve as documents of my deeds from
past for my future. It helps me in not repeating the same mistakes. As a human
being, I cannot run away from committing mistakes, but I can always make sure
that I do not repeat the same mistakes.

> Those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it.

# Blogging & Writing

I had set a target to write 15 blog articles at the beginning of this year. In
the end, I managed to achieve this goal. I managed to write 17 blog posts and
six book reviews. My blog managed to get much traffic this year, mainly thanks
to some of my technical posts.

I got some good responses from people about my technical blog posts. My aim to
start writing technical posts was to keep an account of what I learn. It feels
very nice when I go back to my posts to read how I did something last time. So I
consider myself successful that at least I could benefit from my writing.

Though, in 2018, after leaving college, the frequency of technical posts on this
blog has dipped to almost zero. It is probably because I am not exploring enough
after joining the corporate world. In college, I used Linux all the time, but
now it is nearly four months since I last booted Linux in my system. I think it
is yet another phase of my learning, and I will take some time adjusting with
this. I have some _lovely_ technical post ideas, and I hope that I will be able
to articulate them soon next year.

# Reading

For most of the year, I did not pay any heed to books, and I was never very
interested in buying books. However, at the end of October, I purchased a Kindle
Paperwhite. I consider this to be the
[best](https://twitter.com/yash__here/status/1075396841267752963) investment
done by me this year. Since buying it, I have read eight books. I finally
managed to finish my
[Goodreads reading challenge](https://www.goodreads.com/user_challenges/10979019)
of 10 books. Although I could not finish one book and included one
[audiobook](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/31284204-the-millionaire-booklet)
to this challenge to complete my target on time.

This year, I discovered my interest in Economics. I am reading some
economics-related literature lately. It is a subtle shift from my all-CS life. I
plan to read a lot of economics-related books in 2019 to gain more expertise in
this domain. But I still need to figure out a way to stop it from interfering
with my first (or second, maybe!) love.

Some of my favorite reads from this year (not in any particular order) -

- **Technology / CS**

  1. [Branch Prediction](https://danluu.com/branch-prediction/)
  2. [The Anatomy of a Large-Scale Hypertextual Web Search Engine](https://research.google/pubs/pub334/)
  3. [In defence of swap: common misconceptions](https://chrisdown.name/2018/01/02/in-defence-of-swap.html)
  4. [A few things I've learned about computer networking](https://jvns.ca/blog/2018/03/05/things-ive-learned-networking/)
  5. [Using Go as a scripting language in Linux](https://blog.cloudflare.com/using-go-as-a-scripting-language-in-linux/)
  6. [Maximize Cache Performance with this One Weird Trick: An Introduction to Cache-Oblivious Data Structures](https://rcoh.me/posts/cache-oblivious-datastructures/)
  7. [IBM PC Real Time Clock should run in UT](https://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/~mgk25/mswish/ut-rtc.html)
  8. [The ``Clockwise/Spiral Rule''](http://c-faq.com/decl/spiral.anderson.html)
  9. [A successful Git branching model](https://nvie.com/posts/a-successful-git-branching-model/)
  10. [So, should you do a CS degree?](http://mattjolson.github.io/2017/12/07/benefits-of-a-classical-education.html)
  11. [Accidentally Turing-Complete](http://beza1e1.tuxen.de/articles/accidentally_turing_complete.html)
      {/* 12. [You Can't Sacrifice Partition Tolerance](https://codahale.com/you-cant-sacrifice-partition-tolerance/) */}
  12. [How Apple's New Lineup and iPhone XR will Influence Android Trends, for Better and Worse](https://www.xda-developers.com/apple-new-iphone-xr-influence-android-trends/)
  13. [Perfect Forward Secrecy - An Introduction](https://scotthelme.co.uk/perfect-forward-secrecy/)
  14. [zxcvbn: realistic password strength estimation](https://dropbox.tech/security/zxcvbn-realistic-password-strength-estimation)
  15. [How can I turn photos of paper documents into a scanned document?](https://askubuntu.com/questions/638382/how-can-i-turn-photos-of-paper-documents-into-a-scanned-document)
  16. [Chatbots were the next big thing: what happened?](https://medium.com/swlh/chatbots-were-the-next-big-thing-what-happened-5fc49dd6fa61)
  17. [The AI revolution has spawned a new chips arms race](https://arstechnica.com/gadgets/2018/07/the-ai-revolution-has-spawned-a-new-chips-arms-race/)
  18. [How Firefox is using Pocket to try to build a better news feed than Facebook](https://www.theverge.com/2018/6/13/17446660/mozilla-firefox-pocket-recommendations-ceo-nate-weiner-interview-converge-podcast)
  19. [Countdown to the Singularity](https://www.diamandis.com/blog/countdown-to-the-singularity)
  20. [What the hell is going on with Apple?](https://qz.com/1366350/what-the-hell-is-going-on-with-apple/)
  21. [Why Chinese Artificial Intelligence Will Run The World](https://interestingengineering.com/why-chinese-artificial-intelligence-will-run-the-world)
  22. [Inside Europe's quest to build an unhackable quantum internet](https://www.technologyreview.com/2018/10/22/139629/europes-quest-for-an-unhackable-quantum-internet/)
  23. [The Case Against Quantum Computing](https://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/hardware/the-case-against-quantum-computing)

  {/* <br/> */}

- **Economics**
  1. [Why It's Hard to Escape Amazon's Long Reach](https://www.wired.com/story/why-hard-escape-amazons-long-reach/)
  2. [The Race to a Trillion](https://www.aboveavalon.com/notes/2018/7/11/the-race-to-a-trillion)
  3. [Ambani Is Ready for His Triple Play Close-Up](https://www.bloombergquint.com/opinion/ambani-is-ready-for-his-triple-play-close-up)
  4. [Penalty kicks and behavioural economics](https://www.livemint.com/Opinion/M0oJYwIP1OxJWnzaz6Eo8H/Penalty-kicks-and-behavioural-economics.html)
  5. [The Psychology of Money](https://www.collaborativefund.com/blog/the-psychology-of-money/)
  6. [Apple's Trillion-Dollar World](https://www.bloomberg.com/features/2018-apple-trillion-dollar-world/)
  7. [How to Beat Mid-Career Malaise](https://hbr.org/2018/08/how-to-beat-mid-career-malaise)
  8. [The staggering rise of India's super-rich](https://www.theguardian.com/news/2018/jul/10/the-staggering-rise-of-indias-super-rich)
  9. [Jeff Bezos's $150 Billion Fortune Is a Policy Failure](https://www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/2018/08/the-problem-with-bezos-billions/566552/)
  10. [How 2,000-year-old roads predict modern-day prosperity](https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/2018/08/06/how-year-old-roads-predict-modern-day-prosperity)
  11. [How Subscription Business Models are Changing Business and Investing (the Microeconomics of Subscriptions)](https://25iq.com/2018/08/11/how-subscription-business-models-are-changing-business-and-investing-the-microeconomics-of-subscriptions/)
  12. [What it means to be rich: The difference between income and wealth](https://www.getrichslowly.org/income-vs-wealth/)
  13. [The Dark Decade Ahead](https://seekingalpha.com/article/4205122-dark-decade-ahead)
  14. [The iPhone Franchise](https://stratechery.com/2018/the-iphone-franchise/)
  15. [The Real Cost of the 2008 Financial Crisis](https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2018/09/17/the-real-cost-of-the-2008-financial-crisis)
  16. [How to Get Rich (without getting lucky)](https://twitter.com/naval/status/1002103360646823936?lang=en)
  17. [The Approval Economy](https://zandercutt.com/2018/08/23/the-approval-economy/)
  18. [Five myths about capitalism](https://www.washingtonpost.com/outlook/five-myths/five-myths-about-capitalism/2018/09/27/3f0b72f6-c06f-11e8-90c9-23f963eea204_story.html)
  19. [How Amazon's Retail Revolution Is Changing The Way We Shop](https://www.theverge.com/2018/10/23/17970466/amazon-prime-shopping-behavior-streaming-alexa-minimum-wage)
  20. [Why Wealth Is Determined More by Power Than Productivity](https://evonomics.com/wealth-power-productivity-laurie-macfarlane/)
  21. [Let's Talk About Startup Costs](https://justinjackson.ca/costs)
  22. [How Companies Get You to Pay More for the Same Product](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2018-11-16/how-companies-get-you-to-pay-more-for-the-same-product)
  23. [Why is art so expensive?](https://www.vox.com/the-goods/2018/10/31/18048340/art-market-expensive-ai-painting)
  24. [Stock Markets Are Wild, but Bond Markets Can Be Dangerous](https://www.nytimes.com/2018/12/18/business/bond-market-risks.html)
  25. [British Raj siphoned out $45 trillion from India: Utsa Patnaik](https://www.livemint.com/Companies/HNZA71LNVNNVXQ1eaIKu6M/British-Raj-siphoned-out-45-trillion-from-India-Utsa-Patna.html)
  26. [How to spot the next recession](https://theweek.com/articles/809324/how-spot-next-recession)

{/* <br/> */}

- **Misc**
  1. [In an Era of 'Smart' Things, Sometimes Dumb Stuff Is Better](https://www.nytimes.com/2018/02/21/technology/personaltech/smart-things-dumb-stuff.html)
  2. [Einstein, Aristotle, and Ockham on how real geniuses solve difficult problems](https://www.theladders.com/career-advice/einstein-aristotle-and-ockham-on-how-real-geniuses-solve-difficult-problems)
  3. [Your smartphone📱is making you👈 stupid, antisocial 🙅 and unhealthy 😷. So why can't you put it down❔⁉️](https://www.theglobeandmail.com/technology/your-smartphone-is-making-you-stupid/article37511900/)
  4. Swarajyamag - Indian Nationalism: The Memories Of History - Part I, Part II, Part III
  5. [Take Your Time](https://blog.ncase.me/take-your-time/)
  6. [What Google Learned From Its Quest to Build the Perfect Team](https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/28/magazine/what-google-learned-from-its-quest-to-build-the-perfect-team.html)
  7. [The Friendship That Made Google Huge](https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2018/12/10/the-friendship-that-made-google-huge)
  8. [You are what you write](https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/you-what-write-harry-shum/)
  9. [Being DK In The Age Of MSD](https://swarajyamag.com/ideas/being-dk-in-the-age-of-msd)
  10. [The growing legacy of Rahul Sharad Dravid](https://scroll.in/field/868038/post-retirement-rahul-dravid-is-now-getting-the-unconditional-love-he-always-deserved-as-under-19-world-cup-triumph-showed)
  11. [The Only Real Way to Acquire Wisdom](https://www.theladders.com/career-advice/the-only-real-way-to-acquire-wisdom)
  12. [Personal Sprints: Applying Design Thinking to Your Life](https://fortelabs.co/blog/personal-sprints-applying-design-thinking-to-your-life/)
  13. [Smarter, Not Harder: How to Succeed at Work](https://fs.blog/2018/06/succeed-at-work/)
  14. [Real-Life Schrödinger's Cats Probe the Boundary of the Quantum World](https://www.quantamagazine.org/real-life-schrodingers-cats-probe-the-boundary-of-the-quantum-world-20180625/)
  15. [Which traits predict graduates' earnings?](https://www.economist.com/graphic-detail/2018/06/15/which-traits-predict-graduates-earnings)
  16. [The Power User Curve: The best way to understand your most engaged users](https://andrewchen.co/power-user-curve/)
  17. [What if people were paid for their data?](https://www.economist.com/the-world-if/2018/07/07/data-workers-of-the-world-unite)
  18. [Graduate Student Solves Quantum Verification Problem](https://www.quantamagazine.org/graduate-student-solves-quantum-verification-problem-20181008/)
  19. [It doesn't matter how hard you work – just how busy you look](https://www.spectator.co.uk/article/the-price-of-looking-busy)
  20. [How to Do What You Love](http://www.paulgraham.com/love.html)
  21. [Finding It Hard to Focus? Maybe It's Not Your Fault](https://www.nytimes.com/2018/08/14/style/how-can-i-focus-better.html)
  22. [First Mover Disadvantage](https://avc.com/2018/08/first-mover-disadvantage/)
  23. [The ShareChat Phenomenon](https://the-ken.com/story/the-sharechat-phenomenon/)
  24. [Atal Bihari Vajpayee and his Achilles heel: Excerpts from Vinod Mehta's memoirs](https://scroll.in/article/890631/vinod-mehta-on-atal-behari-vajpayee-and-the-1998-nuclear-tests-how-a-tired-pm-became-a-bold-pm)
  25. [Work-life balance is an unhealthy myth](https://medium.com/the-ascent/is-work-life-balance-a-myth-c328377966de)
  26. [Who controls your data?](https://www.engadget.com/2018-09-04-who-controls-your-data.html)
  27. [Your First Ninety Days in Hell](https://www.newyorker.com/humor/daily-shouts/your-first-ninety-days-in-hell)
  28. [The internet can't handle functioning like a democracy](https://qz.com/1422925/the-public-internet-was-almost-a-democracy/)
  29. [How to Pick a Career (That Actually Fits You)](https://waitbutwhy.com/2018/04/picking-career.html)
  30. [The Surprising Power of The Long Game](https://fs.blog/2018/10/long-game/)
  31. [Why the world needs deep generalists, not specialists](https://www.jotform.com/blog/the-world-needs-polymaths/)
  32. [10 Types of Odd Friendships You're Probably Part Of](https://waitbutwhy.com/2014/12/10-types-odd-friendships-youre-probably-part.html)

I used [Instapaper](https://www.instapaper.com) extensively throughout the year
to manage and save the articles that I liked. Although I was never very
consistent in reading those saved articles, it was still a good exercise. I
finished all my pending pile of saved articles by the end of the year. Moreover,
for this post, it became straightforward for me to recollect those links. This
list grew excessively large, but I did not want to lose any of these links
because of some random third-party service shutting down, so I am adding them
here for easy reference in the future.

Next year onwards, I plan to read one academic paper from my favorite areas of
CS in every two weeks and summarise them to improve my understanding of the
domain (the `/readings` section of my blog was initially intended for
this purpose). Moreover, seeing my experience in the last two months, I feel
encouraged to increase my Goodreads reading challenge to 20 books.

# Work

The year 2018 was a pivotal year for me on this front. It was the year when I
had to come out of the comfort zone of my parents' protection. My professional
life began this year, and I started earning MONEY. It feels delightful when you
see the money gets deposited to your bank account every month for the hard(!)
work that you have done for the last one month. But

> With great power comes great responsibility.

I believe that I have been able to control this feeling of power quite nicely
until now. Probably being an _Agarwal_ helped :P

Coming back to work, those who do not know, I joined Cisco Systems this year as
a Software Engineer. The job is pretty good for my initial expectations. I made
some good friends. First time in my life, I managed to make a group of friends.

Quite an achievement.

# Studies

This year was officially my last year in formal education.
{/* May I convert all the opportunities that God is going to give me soon in this regard */}
Although I failed to finish my bachelors with a satisfactory final GPA (at least
I am not happy with it), I am very much satisfied with all my learnings from
college. I learned many life lessons, kept myself in check, built some useful
contacts, learned a lot about many CS-related things, and ended up with a decent
job in the end.

However, I sense that this is not the happy ending of my journey towards
learning, and I have a lot more to learn. I recently read the book "The
Alchemist," and the central theme of this book is to keep looking for your
legend. I am still searching for my legend. In 2019, I expect to find new ways
to keep learning and explore new areas both in CS and other fields of life.

# Relationships

Before this year, I had an assumption that I lack social skills. I hesitated in
talking to people. I decided to change it this year. I was waiting for a change
in my life, probably because NITC had become too monotonous for me. It was one
of my new year's resolution that I will change myself and become more
approachable to people.

I do not know if I have changed or not, but I feel much more confident now than
ever in communicating with people. I hope I will continue to improve in 2019 as
well.

# Social Media

I was trying to get rid of Facebook for quite some time. This year, I finally
managed to control my addiction. For a good part of the year, either my Facebook
account remained deactivated, or I was logged out of it. In the past, I used to
feel a strong urge to open Facebook every ten minutes, but this year, I was able
to keep this urge in control. When my account was not deactivated, I kept myself
so busy in other works, that I did not even think of Facebook.

Moreover, the good thing is that I did not notice any symptoms of withdrawal
symptoms because of this sudden quitting of Facebook. A friend's advice worked
nicely. It was quite tricky, indeed.

I was never addicted to any other social media platform, but I decided that I
can use Twitter for my benefit. I feel Twitter is a useful tool if utilized
correctly. I followed many people who tweet regularly about CS related stuff. I
open Twitter once every 2-3 days for a very short duration to collect some
articles and tips. Nowadays, these articles, along with a few blog articles from
Feedly, mainly form my Instapaper feed. Though Instapaper recently switched to
commercial model again, I decided to keep using it for the time being until I
find some other alternative.

# Miscellaneous

I had decided to exercise for at least 90% part of 2018. I failed miserably.
Leave alone every day; I could not even do it continuously for one month. I need
to make this a top priority. Otherwise, it is going to create trouble for me
soon.

For the last two years, I am trying to get up early in the morning every day. My
body does not seem to care, though. It seems a classic example of the struggle
between mind and body. My brain says that I am an early bird, but my body
straightforwardly rejects this idea. I have felt the positives of waking up
early, so I am still trying my best so that my body can adjust to this change. I
will keep working on this habit in 2019 as well.

I noticed a bad habit in myself - procrastination. I procrastinated a lot
in 2018. Things that I could have finished well within the deadlines took me
ages to complete. I was always late in my BTech project deadlines, I could not
finish one of my hobby projects, I could not finish my study targets on time,
and many other such examples haunted me this year. It is one of my most
important goals of 2019 that I need a way to find how to concentrate on one
thing at a time. Many things distract me while I am working. Technology itself
is a significant distraction, but because I am a CS professional, this is one
thing from which I cannot run away. However, I will still try to avoid getting
distracted by my _curiosity_ and put more focus on doing work.

I am writing more than ever. However, with my increased writing, my English
vocabulary is not enough anymore. This year, it happened many times that I
wanted to write something, but because of the lack of proper words in my
vocabulary, I had to settle with _inferior_ words. I tried multiple times this
year to work on improving my vocabulary, but I failed badly. I will increase my
focus on improving my knowledge of English in 2019 so that such small issues do
not stop me from adding something to my skills.

This year, I experimented and tried to organize myself with to-do lists. It was
a fruitful exercise, and it had a lot of sound effects on my productivity. The
days when I made a to-do list, I felt very energetic and encouraged to finish
all the tasks on my list. However, then I noticed one thing, I could not
continue doing this for more than a few days at once. For initial days, I felt
encouraged to complete my tasks, but soon it began to appear as a burden, and I
felt exhausted. So it seems that something in the middle will work for me. This
year, I will continue using to-do lists (I use Google Keep for this) but for
short durations of time. I will refrain from using it every day to avoid getting
exhausted. I am considering a switch to [Notion](https://www.notion.so/) to
maintain my monthly and long-term goals. Probably that will also help me in
keeping track of my goals without feeling the heat.

All of my friends love to travel. It seems a common habit in most of my friends.
However, I am an exception. I'm not particularly eager to go on trips. I
attribute it to my issues with motion sickness. For the whole year of 2018, I do
not have a single trip memory other than my travels to Bengaluru and Jaipur
airports. Oh yeah, after thinking for some time, I recalled that I went on one
trip from Bengaluru to Calicut to attend my convocation ceremony. That's all! I
will _consider_ accepting trip invitations from my friends in 2019. Up until
now, I keep refusing to join them in their trips due to my health issues, my
desire to stay in solitude and partially because of my unwillingness to explore
anything outside technology. However, it is time I start changing myself.

It was a grave mistake that during my four-year stay in Kerala, I did not try to
learn Malayalam. I feel that I missed an excellent opportunity to learn a new
language. Although I am as bad as other north Indians when it comes to knowing
multiple languages (correct me if I am wrong, I do not intend to generalize all
north Indians), I think that learning a new language can be very beneficial for
_some parts of my brain_. Now I am in Karnataka, yet another south Indian state
and with yet another language. It is an excellent opportunity, and I am not
going to repeat my mistake this time. Even if I do not succeed in learning
Kannada, it will provide enough challenges to my brain for the short term. Who
knows, it might also give me a new skill!

**Welcome 2019, I hope that you will help me in taking a step closer to
discovering myself. Give me new experiences, keep me grounded and help me in
contributing to the progress of my India.** 😊
