---
title: "Go + gRPC + OPA - A Perfect Union - Part 1"
createdOn: 2019-02-10T14:29:08+05:30
status: "published"
series:
  order: 1
  title: "Go + gRPC + OPA - A Perfect Union"
tags:
  - Development
  - Golang
  - OPA
  - gRPC
---

**TL;DR** -- In a series of blog posts, I will be implementing a simple library
application supporting both gRPC and REST interfaces using Go, gRPC, and OPA. My
approach might not be the most optimal one, but I am learning these technologies
currently. Please give your valuable suggestions and be kind :)

I have been learning the basics of microservices and Golang lately. On the work
front, I got a chance to work on Go, gRPC, and Open Policy Agent as my first
professional project. In this post, I will be demonstrating what I learned in
the last few months. We will be implementing a simple gRPC based library
service, which will be able to serve requests using both gRPC and REST calls. It
will also incorporate the Open Policy Agent (OPA) to provide the authorization
to users. Let's begin with a quick introduction to gRPC and OPA.

# gRPC

gRPC is Google's implementation for Remote Procedure Calls(RPC). RPC is mainly
used in building scalable distributed systems. While REST has a limited set of
verbs, RPC can define any function calls, including synchronous and asynchronous
calls.

In gRPC, the client can make procedure calls as if the requests are made to some
local function. However, the underlying client stub (auto-generated) will send
the call to the server. The server will have a similar server stub, which will
be able to handle the requests coming from the client. The server will send the
response to the client using similar mechanisms over the network. All the
communication is serialized to binary format, so it is ideal for distributed
systems as binary format tends to be on the faster side for large amounts of
data.

For more info about gRPC, visit the official [website](https://grpc.io/).

# Open Policy Agent (OPA)

OPA gives us the ability to define a fine-grained policy control mechanism.
However, I think the most critical benefit of using OPA is that it gives you the
ability to decouple your services and the definition of policies from the
enforcement of it.

There are mainly two parts of OPA -

1. A JSON document store where you can define anything from your users, access
   roles, permission levels, etc.
2. A policy is written in a declarative language. This policy gives you new
   derivative data from the original JSON document store evaluated by the
   policy. The declarative language is called Rego, and these policies are also
   documents that generate results according to the defined policy. The users
   query these results.

This info will be sufficient for our use case. More info about it can be found
at the official [website](https://www.openpolicyagent.org/).

# The skeleton of our Application

We will be building a command-line library application. This application will
support adding, deleting, searching, issuing, and returning of books. There are
three types of users -- student, faculties, and staff. Not all users have a
similar kind of access level. There are some books which are only reserved for
students, and some are exclusively reserved for faculties and so on.

I think emulating the
[library](https://harrypotter.fandom.com/wiki/Hogwarts_Library) at Hogwarts will
be a good idea here. Students and ordinary people were not allowed inside the
restricted section of the library. We will emulate that restricted section using
the authorization mechanisms provided by OPA.

The gRPC protocol will handle the communications part in our app, but not
everyone in Hogwarts is using gRPC. Wizards are still in love with REST (not a
bad thing, though), so we will provide them alike the REST interface to interact
with our service. We do not want to face the wrath of the wizards, after all.

OPA can either be used as a standalone application or be embedded in the Go
service as well. Both approaches have their pros and cons. I have decided to use
OPA as an independent service, as it will be more comfortable that way for us to
push authorization data and policies to it if such a need arises in the future.

One more issue remains - where to store the added books. Shall we persist them?
In practical scenarios, persistence is always a good idea, but here I do not
want to complicate things too much. We could use any Object storage servers
(e.g., Minio) to store the JSON data generated from our gRPC methods, but that
will unnecessarily add complexity to our simple scenario. Wizards do not like
complicate stuff, you know!

In the next posts, we will define our gRPC proto file and build the Go service
around it. Then we will add a REST interface to our service for simple CRUD
operations in our application. Then we will add OPA authorization to restrict
our users from adding and viewing books which they are not supposed to access.

Thank you for reading. Cheers ðŸ˜„
