---
title: Mistakes That I Made in NITC
createdOn: "2018-06-01T10:21:45+05:30"
status: published
tags:
  - Career
  - Education
  - Experiences
  - Learning
category: Personal
description: >-
  Reflecting on key lessons and mistakes from college life at NITC, covering
  studies, communication, and personal growth for future self-improvement.
updatedOn: "2025-05-29T16:17:34+05:30"
_categorized: 48999d162f3b7372e40bacec9a5647f2
---

Now that I am graduated from NIT Calicut, one more chapter of my life is over.
It is time to move on to the next page, but before I begin that phase, I thought
it would be nice, to sum up, the experience that I gathered in NIT Calicut. The
last four years have been great for me. I learned a lot of new life lessons, but
there were some decisions that I could have avoided. I take full responsibility
for my actions and do not blame anybody for the same. Although I do not regret
taking any of those decisions, I feel it is crucial to document all those
lessons before they vanish from my _otherwise_ average memory. This post is
intended to serve as a document for my future self, but most of the content here
should be able to help anyone who happens to read this post. Most of this
content has been taken from my journal, which I maintained (not consistently)
over the last two years.

# Studies

From the first year itself, I had an impression from various online QA sites and
some seniors that studies are not a big deal in college. That was a grave
mistake which cost me a lot during my college life. I tried to compensate for it
in the latter half of my graduation, but that was not enough.

While my friends used to learn by teaching each other, I never enjoyed studying
in groups. I wish I had participated more in such group learning activities.

Most of the courses taught in traditional colleges like NITC are useless, in my
opinion. However, Data Structures and Algorithms(DSA) was one subject which
shows its importance again and again. It is one of those subjects where I should
have put more attention. Although I was suffering from a fracture at the time of
this course, some more efforts from my side could have changed things as they
are today.

# Wrong learning methods

I always tended to learn anything new using the tutorials available on the
Internet. It is fine, but I never tried to do any projects/practicals to
strengthen my learning. In my experience, it is always better to learn any
programming language by doing projects in it.

My first programming language was C, which was taught in an introductory course
in the first year. C is a relatively low-level language, and it helped me in
understanding many concepts and working on many systems related stuff. Still, I
feel that it is also one of the reasons that I am not able to think in
higher-level abstraction. When I started learning Python, I was not able to
think anything in abstract terms. I wish I had put more effort into learning
Python or any other OOP language early in my college life.

# Communication

I have always been an introvert person when it comes to communicating with
people. I wish I had worked on improving this aspect of my personality. For the
first two years, I never asked any seniors for advice, never asked any questions
in the classroom, never discussed project ideas with any faculty. I tried to
improve myself in the last two years, and I feel satisfied with my efforts. In
my opinion, it is always better to ask a more experienced person for their
advice than to take blind steps and regret later.

I was hesitant about talking to people from different linguistic backgrounds in
my first and second years. Again thanks to my inability to communicate with new
people. I improved this later, but first impressions are crucial, if not
everything.

# Friends and seniors

In my first year, I made a mistake by choosing to befriend some people who
identified themselves as _state seniors_ (people from the same north Indian
state as I am). I was naive in identifying people at that time, but when I look
back now, I feel that if I had avoided those people and invested that time in
learning something related to CS, I could have gained more out of college. For a
person who was entirely new for CS, that one year's time was very crucial, and I
completely wasted it. It took me two years to rectify my mistake.

# Not taking breaks

I never took breaks from learning new things. I always put my work ahead of my
personal life. That was the wrong approach. However, I do not blame myself for
this. I was new to such work-life equations, and I did not realize the
requirement to maintain a proper work-life balance. I wanted to learn a lot of
new things, and college provided me a suitable environment, but I feel that I
exhausted myself many times. That resulted in my loss of interest from Computer
Science also in the second year.

# Writing and Reading

I was never a voracious reader in my childhood. I never tried to spend my free
time with books. After coming to college, I saw many people reading books day
and night. That inspired me to develop a new hobby of **Reading**. Although I
still do not read a lot (just 5-6 books a year), it is better than reading none.

I started this blog in the second year. My intention was _not_ to write. I just
wanted to learn how to set up Wordpress and Jekyll. However, slowly I developed
the habit of writing. I now consider it the biggest takeaway from college.
Writing a blog has helped me learn new things and systematically explain things.

I tried to write a journal to document significant events in life, but I could
not maintain it regularly. That is one thing which I would like to improve in
the coming years.
