---
title: "Deactivated My Facebook Account"
published: 2018-03-23T21:00:44+05:30
status: "published"
tags:
  - Social Media
  - Detoxification
  - Experiences
---

Today, I deactivated my Facebook account again. For the last few days, I was
feeling that I am using Facebook excessively. It was affecting my work, my
_public life_. I was using Facebook day in and day out. Today when I woke up in
the morning, I first opened Facebook and didn't leave my bed for one hour. I
realized that I had wasted one hour merely browsing through useless stuff.
Immediately, I decided to deactivate the account for some time and analyze how
much my life changes by one less distraction.

Coincidentally, it is the time of [Ragam](http://ragam.org.in/Main/), the annual
cultural festival of NIT Calicut. I _introspect_ myself every year at the same
time. For the last two years, this introspection is resulting in the
deactivation of my Facebook account. It is the reason why I could finish all my
pending projects in the summers.

I sometimes feel that after coming to NITC, I have become much more socially
awkward and even more of a loner than I was before. I never enjoyed going into
public events, but in college, that tendency seems to have increased a lot. Now,
I do not feel comfortable with this state. I want to change this, but every time
I try, there is some _invisible force_ which pulls me back from expressing
myself. NITC's environment was entirely different for a person like me, who
always preferred to stay alone. So, I built a _bubble_ around myself, where
there is no one to disturb or doubt me. It was okay in the initial years of my
campus life when circumstances were not in my favor, but now this bubble is an
obstacle for me. I feel difficulty in coming out of this bubble.

There are only one and a half months left of my undergraduate life. I might not
overcome this fear at this time. But I hope that the change of environment will
help me cross this barrier. I have learned a lot of lessons from my mistakes in
the past, and I hope that I will not repeat one of the biggest mistakes of my
life.

I will write again about the changes I feel after deactivating Facebook. In the
meantime, I will try to spend more time with my friends and less on my laptop.
ðŸ˜Œ
