---
title: "Two Years at Cisco"
published: 2020-09-16T22:03:46+05:30
status: "published"
---

I completed two years at Cisco in August recently. I think it is a good time to
jot down my learnings and experiences from the past two years. It was my first
corporate job; however, I did not land up in a typical software development job.
Hence, my experiences are quite different and unique in a sense.

I joined Cisco in 2018. As it usually happens with university recruits, I was
also randomly assigned to a team in the Office of CTO in Security Business Group
(SBG) in Cisco. I got assigned to a non-product team that worked in a
semi-research environment to develop PoCs demonstrating the integration of
future-looking technologies with the existing Cisco portfolio. The nature of
this work gave me some exciting skills and exposure to latest trends in
industry, but it came with its own set of disadvantages. I will discuss some of
them at the end of this article.

# Take Ownership of your work

Every member worked on a reasonably independent project in my team, directly
supervised by a Principal Engineer or a Technical Lead. Most of my superiors
(including my manager) were located in the USA, so there were many early-night
meetings involved. This also meant that nobody watched (micromanaged ðŸ™Š) me, and
I was given quite a bit of autonomy. I really appreciate this aspect.

I learned how to come out of a problem when there is nobody to help or guide
you. Of course, I asked for help whenever needed; the freedom I enjoyed at work
was unparalleled.

During two years, there were many occasions when some of my design and
development choices were questioned. I successfully defended some of them and
had to change the others. In the process, I learned the caveats in my
understanding and the importance of others' perspectives while solving difficult
problems.

# Developers should have experience with operations

As I mentioned above, most of my projects were individual projects. Naturally,
the responsibility of setting up and maintenance of the build-environment also
fell on my shoulders. My experience with Linux system administration from
college time came to my rescue here. In the process, I learned how invaluable
the skills of DevOps can be for a developer.

There is a lot that I don't know yet, but my basics have grown strong enough to
grasp any new technology in a reasonable amount of time over the past two years.

# Communications

I have never been a good speaker, and talking to strangers has been one of my
weakest skills. After joining Cisco, this aspect of my personality has changed
considerably. Attending regular meetings and speaking about my ideas and work
gave me confidence. There are still some caveats with my public speaking skills.
I hope that I would be able to overcome these challenges with more experience.

# Innovation

The industry provides you access to the best minds in your field. You get to
meet wise people working and using their knowledge and expertise to generate
ideas that can change the world (or at least the industry). It motivates you to
compete with them. Although I have been unable to generate any patentable idea
in the past two years, I have been invited to participate in the discussions,
which led to patent applications. My biggest takeaway from these discussions was
that breadth is more useful than depth when it comes to idea generation. Knowing
various fields and connecting two seemingly different domains is a skill whose
importance cannot be overemphasized.

Another thing I learned is that aiming for perfection doesn't help anyone. To
keep waiting for that best idea to pop up in your mind is illusionary and will
never happen. I have been a victim of this tendency to perfectionism the whole
of my life. For the past couple of months, I have been actively trying to avoid
this habit. My inconsistency in regularly writing on this blog can also be
attributed to my search for the _ideal_ blog post.

In my opinion, quantity is better than quality. The same is true with the
generation of ideas. If you keep waiting that you will get the ultimate idea one
day, believe me, it will never happen.

# Take a step back & rethink

It happened quite a few times that I started looking for a solution to a problem
in one direction. After spending a considerable amount of time, I figured out
that the direction was wrong or worse, my understanding of the problem was
wrong. In such situations, it is better to backtrack and think again. It also
helps to ask someone for help. Sometimes, others can give you a different
perspective that you might not be able to see.

# Don't hesitate to brag about yourself

When I joined Cisco, my colleagues suggested me to set up 1-1 with my manager to
stay in touch with him and showcase my work. I hesitated. I thought that what is
the point of talking about my work when it is visible to everybody through
weekly meetings. Now I understand, it is such a crucial step which shouldn't be
ignored at all. Keep a [brag](https://jvns.ca/blog/brag-documents/) document and
use it to keep records of your work, achievements, and accomplishments. I never
needed it till now, but I plan to use it in the future.

---

Coming to downsides, I have only one qualm. As I mentioned above, my team was
not a product team. So I missed out on some of the necessary product development
experience. I believe that having some experience developing and shipping
production-ready code is an absolute requirement to move towards my career
goals. Thankfully, I have switched my team now, and now I will be working on a
full-fledged security offering of Cisco.

---

So, these are some of my insights from the past two years at Cisco. I want to
share a lot of other thoughts, but their time hasn't come yet. I will definitely
share more of these as I spend more time in the industry and tech.
